Submitted for publication in
Journal of Physics: Conference Series
(HAPP 10th Anniversary Commemorative Volume)

3
2
0
2

c
e
D
8
2

]
P
E
.
h
p
-
o
r
t
s
a
[

1
v
7
4
8
6
1
.
2
1
3
2
:
v
i
X
r
a

SETI at FAST in China

1,2Tong-Jie Zhang, 1,2Bo-Lun Huang, 1,2Jian-Kang Li, 1,2,3Zhen-Zhao
Tao, 1,2Xiao-Hang Luan, 6Zhi-Song Zhang, 1,4,5Yu-Chen Wang
1Institute for Frontiers in Astronomy and Astrophysics, Beijing Normal University, Beijing
102206, China
2Department of Astronomy, Beijing Normal University, Beijing 100875, China
3Institute for Astronomical Science, Dezhou University, Dezhou 253023, China
4Kavli Institute for Astronomy and Astrophysics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
5Department of Astronomy, School of Physics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
6National Astronomical Observatories, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100012, China

E-mail: tjzhang@bnu.edu.cn

Abstract. Since the commencement of the first SETI observation in 2019, China’s Search for
Extraterrestrial Intelligence program has garnered momentum through domestic support and
international collaborations. Several observations targeting exoplanets and nearby stars have
been conducted with the FAST. In 2023, the introduction of the Far Neighbour Project(FNP)
marks a substantial leap forward, driven by the remarkable sensitivity of the FAST telescope
and some of the novel observational techniques. The FNP seeks to methodically detect
technosignatures from celestial bodies, including nearby stars, exoplanetary systems, Milky
Way globular clusters, and more. This paper provides an overview of the progress achieved by
SETI in China and offers insights into the distinct phases comprising the FNP. Additionally, it
underscores the significance of this project’s advancement and its potential contributions to the
field.

1. Introduction
Humans have been wondering about the universe even before the emergence of our civilizations.
With the belief that intelligent life inhabited among the stars would share similar ambitions
and imaginations as we do, the concept of Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence(SETI) was
therefore raised in the early 20th century.
In the past century, with the innovation and
construction of radio telescopes, astronomers can finally look for artificial signals from outer
space in the radio domain of the electromagnetic spectrum. Early SETI projects like Project
Ozma and Project Phoenix laid the groundwork for subsequent efforts in the ongoing quest
to detect signals or signs of intelligent life beyond Earth [1, 2]. While no definitive evidence
has been found to date, these endeavours have contributed to advancing our understanding
In 2016, The Five-hundred-
of the cosmos and the potential existence of other intelligence.
meter Aperture Spherical Telescope(FAST), as shown in Fig.1, started its collaboration with
the Breakthrough Listen Initiative to search for weak radio technosignaures from nearby stars,
and the first SETI observation in China was conducted in the year 2019. From 2019 to 2023, we
have conducted multiple observations targeting various celestial objects including nearby stars,
exoplanets found by the Kepler space telescope, and sky regions that are considered to contain
potential extraterrestrial intelligence(ETI) sources by the SETI@home program. In 2023, with

 
 
 
 
 
 
developments in data analysis techniques and observation strategies, we decided to propose the
first long-term SETI project in China named the Far Neighbour Project(FNP) that aims to
systematically search for ETI signals or leakage signals with a comprehensive workflow.

2. SETI in China 2019-2023
SETI is one of the five core scientific objectives of FAST, and its implementation commenced
promptly following the completion of the FAST construction in 2016. In 2019, FAST was able
to make its first step in the SETI observation, and multiple observations have taken place
subsequently in the following years in collaboration with the Breakthrough Listen initiative and
the University of California, Berkeley [3].

Figure 1. A panoramic view of the FAST in early 2020 [4].

2.1. First SETI observation in China
After three years of testing and technical adjustments, the development of compatible software
and the installation of hardware, the first SETI observation in China was successfully conducted
with the newly installed 19-beam receiver and the SERENDIP VI spectrometer on FAST
[5]. With improvement in sensitivity, FAST is also receiving an enormous amount of weak
radio frequency interference(RFI). Machine learning techniques were used to mitigate the RFI
collected by FAST. This observation served as a test observation and it demonstrated that the
majority of RFI was filtered out by the machine learning algorithm and the signal ranking
pipeline called Nebula is also compatible with the observational data generated from FAST.
The first SETI observation in China and its data analysis pipeline have proven the feasibility of
SETI research with FAST, moreover, it marks the starting point of SETI in China [3].

2.2. Observation towards 33 exoplanets
During April 2021 and September 2021, we conducted 11 rounds of targeted observations
towards 33 exoplanetary systems [6]. These exoplanets were selected generally based on their
habitability and whether or not they are in the Earth Transit Zone.
In SETI, we usually
quantify the sensitivity of a particular survey by the minimum detectable Effective Isotropic
Radiated Power(EIRP) of a hypothetical extraterrestrial transmitter on that target. For the
nearest exoplanetary system in this survey and its host star, Ross 128, the minimum detectable
EIRP of a transmitter located in the Ross 128 stellar system for FAST is calculated to be
1.48 × 109 W which is almost three orders of magnitudes less than the EIRP of the planetary
radar mounted at the Arecibo observatory. Therefore, under the assumption that some of the
alien civilizations are actively broadcasting their messages, FAST is capable of detecting such
a signal even if the transmitter of the sender civilization possesses a significantly lower EIRP
than the planetary radar at Arecibo. Furthermore, a new observation method is proposed and
applied for this mission which is called the MultiBeam Coincidence Matching(MBCM) method.
This method is similar to the ON-OFF method which has been widely utilized in the field of
targeted SETI observation and the principle is that a sky-localized signal would not be detected
in different telescope pointings(pointings are at least six half-power beam-width away from each
other). The MBCM method takes advantage of the FAST’s 19-beam receiver by simultaneously
recording data in the centre beam and the six outermost beams. With the assistance of the
MBCM method, we successfully eliminated all but one signal named NBS 210629 as can be seen
in Fig. 2. However, it was later determined to be RFI by comparisons with RFI that showed
similar frequency and polarization characteristics. In the re-observation towards NBS 210629
in November 2021, no signal that possesses similar characteristics was detected by the same
instrument and observation strategy.

In 2022, the observational data was revisited with the blind search mode of the MBCM method
which aims to search for signals from the vicinity of the target exoplanets (radar or leakage
radiation from a spacecraft) [7]. The blind search mode successfully found the signal NBS
210629, and another signal named NBS 210421 that the standard MBCM failed to return.
However, NBS 210421 was thought to most likely come from a ground-based RFI due to similar
features with the other four obvious RFI.

2.3. Observation targeting nearby stars
Nearby stars have been a popular type of observation target since the beginning of SETI
research. Suppose we are under the assumption that the distribution or model that describes
the possible range of power levels of signals emitted by extraterrestrial transmitters follows a
power law, which means that lower power transmitters are more abundant than those with a
higher power. FAST, as the world’s largest filled-aperture radio telescope, is ideal for searching
weak radio signals from nearby stars with its extreme sensitivity.
In 2022, we observed 14
nearby stars which were selected by their distance and whether they were in the Earth Transit
Zone. However, no signal was considered a candidate ETI signal. In 2023, we conducted an
observation of Barnard’s star system with the minimum detectable EIRP reaching 4.36 × 108
which is impossible to achieve by any other instrument to date [8]. Furthermore, we developed
a novel observation strategy called MultiBeam Point-source scanning(MBPS) observation as
shown in Fig.3 based on the configuration of the FAST’s 19-beam receiver and tested it in an
observation towards the TRAPPIST-1 system. The MBPS is especially sensitive to persistent
narrowband signal detection because a cross-verification procedure can be implemented with
several newly introduced parameters in a single observation [9].

Figure 2. The signal NBS 210629. It was detected around 1140.604 MHz during our 20-minute
observation of Kepler-438. The relative position of the subfigures stands as a representation of
the 19-beam receiver of the FAST. The signal is detected only in the central beam, and not in
any of the reference beams.[6]

Figure 3. The MBPS works by scanning the target object, each of the 19 beams would show a
different representation of the signal and it is time-dependent because of their slightly different
pointings during the scanning observation. [9]

5045403530252015105051015RA (arcmin)15105051015Dec (arcmin)(17.22, 0)16171815671914512813439121110161718156719145128134391211102.4. Observation with SETI@home
With our collaboration with the SETI@home program, we re-observed the most promising
candidates from the SETI@home Arecibo Sky survey using FAST. The SETI@home team has
collected a list of the top SETI candidate sky regions obtained from 14 years of commensal
multibeam observation at Arecibo [10]. This data collection involved numerous years of volunteer
In 2022, we
computing time, followed by analysis using the Nebula SETI data pipeline.
conducted an observation of 51 sky regions from the SETI@home candidate list, and we are
currently in the process of developing a new algorithm to search for signals that were previously
detected by the SETI@home Arecibo sky survey.

To achieve an RFI excision like in the Nebula pipeline, we introduced a method involving the
detection of continuous narrowband RFI using a threshold for sky separation and identifying
drifting RFI using the Hough transform. Additionally, we incorporate machine learning to
further eliminate RFI and pinpoint potential candidates. Our study compares this approach to
previous work on the same FAST data. Despite its computational simplicity, the new method
efficiently removed more RFI while retaining simulated ETI signals, except for those severely
affected by RFI. Moreover, we identified a greater number of candidate signals, encompassing
about twelve new candidates not previously reported [11].

3. Far Neighbour Project
With increasing observation opportunities at FAST and the desire to explore the unknowns, we
initiated the Far Neighbour Project(FNP) at Beijing Normal University in the summer of 2023.
The FNP stands as a long-term project, there are generally four stages in this project.

3.1. Stage I: Search for technosignaures beyond Earth
At the initial stage of the FNP, we aim to systematically search for technosignaures from
various celestial objects under a rigorous framework and pipeline. The FNP target selection
strategy is designed in a way that maximizes the probability of detecting ETI signals. For
example, we will conduct observation towards some of the Milky Way globular clusters as
well as nearby stars in the first year of the FNP. The list of observation targets is updated
every year, and it is determined according to the latest SETI theories and other related
fields like astrobiology, exoplanetary science, etc. With our collaborative relationship with the
Breakthrough Listen initiative and the SETI@home program, we continue the re-observation to
observe the best candidates from the SETI@home Arecibo Sky survey. And together with the
Breakthrough Listen team, we test and develop new data analysis techniques to remove RFI
like the polarization characteristics, and dispersion feature [12, 13, 14].

3.2. Stage II: Searching and messaging
This stage is initiated only if more than one high-confidence ETI signal is found. In this stage,
the FNP will endeavour to decode the incoming messages and conduct detailed investigations of
the source objects. Once an agreement is established based on the results of the investigation, a
simple and straightforward message will be transmitted to the source object from a spacecraft
that is located at a sufficiently distant region from Earth, the exact distance is determined by
how far the source object is and the advancement of our technology at that time. We expect
that the FNP will remain at this stage for a timescale of tens of years (messages from nearby
stars), thousands of years (messages from Milky Way globular clusters), or longer than millions
of years (messages from other galaxies).

3.3. Stage III: Searching and Communication
This stage will be heavily dependent on our technological and cultural development at that
time, thus it is difficult to even broadly predict the timescale. Generally, in this stage, we will
progressively establish trust through consistent and cautious communication and explore limited
collaborations in areas like information exchange or basic scientific knowledge.

3.4. Stage IV: The Far Neighbour atlas
This stage will commence after we have gained a comprehensive understanding of multiple
extraterrestrial civilizations. By working with various civilizations, the FNP will be assisting in
the writing of the Far Neighbour atlas, both a map and catalogue that describe the vastness of
the Milky Way and more importantly, the civilizations that reside within it.

4. Conclusion
To this date, our species has been conducting SETI research under a series of scientific theories for
decades which is merely a tiny fraction even compared to the age of our civilization. With China’s
involvement in SETI research, we will accelerate the progress of SETI studies and conduct more
sensitive observations of a greater number of celestial targets. Our novel observation methods,
such as MBCM and MBPS, are expected to significantly enhance the efficiency and accuracy
of data processing. In addition to observational efforts, we are also committed to integrating
multiple disciplines to continuously refine the theoretical frontier of SETI.

In the FNP, we are dealing with signals with unknown characteristics, therefore, we propose
the FNP as a long-term project without a predetermined duration. For Stage I, observations
and development of SETI theories and new data processing techniques are the major focus.
However, in this paper, the descriptions for Stages II to IV are relatively succinct compared to
Stage I. This is because we envision the FNP as a program that can span over a millennium
and more, provided our civilization endures. Given such an extended timescale, the rapid
pace of technological development and scientific discoveries might significantly advance the
methods and efficiencies outlined in our project. Therefore, we have refrained from elaborately
detailing the implementation of stages II to IV, which have yet to be initiated. To date, we
possess no evidence pertaining to the existence of extraterrestrial civilizations, let alone their
spatial distribution. Consequently, the prospective outcome of the FNP remains challenging to
anticipate. Nonetheless, even following meticulous observation and analysis, should the quest
for any discernible ETI signals yield no results, we shall attain a more profound comprehension
of the distribution of technological civilizations in the cosmos. Additionally, while conducting
SETI research, we will also use data from SETI observations to explore other auxiliary scientific
research in the field of astrophysics.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National SKA Program of China (2022SKA0110202) and the
National Natural Science Foundation of China (grants No. 11929301).

References

[1] Shuch H P 2010 Project ozma: the birth of observational seti Searching for Extraterrestrial

Intelligence: SETI Past, Present, and Future (Springer) pp 13–18

[2] Backus P et al. 2004 Project phoenix: A summary of seti observations and results, 1995-

2004 American Astronomical Society Meeting Abstracts# 204 vol 204 pp 75–04

[3] Zhang Z S, Werthimer D, Zhang T J, Cobb J, Korpela E, Anderson D, Gajjar V, Lee R,

Li S Y, Pei X et al. 2020 The Astrophysical Journal 891 174

[4] FAST-program 2020 Panoramic view of the fast URL https://fast.bao.ac.cn/static/

uploadfiles/202003/202003311002132561.jpg

[5] Zhang Z S, Zhang H Y, Zhu Y et al. 2020 Journal of Deep Space Exploration 7 158–163
[6] Tao Z Z, Zhao H C, Zhang T J, Gajjar V, Zhu Y, Yue Y L, Zhang H Y, Liu W F, Li S Y,

Zhang J C et al. 2022 The Astronomical Journal 164 160

[7] Luan X H, Tao Z Z, Zhao H C, Huang B L, Li S Y, Liu C, Wang H F, Liu W F, Zhang

T J, Gajjar V et al. 2023 The Astronomical Journal 165 132

[8] Tao Z Z, Huang B L, Luan X H, Li J K, Zhao H C, Wang H F and Zhang T J 2023 The

Astronomical Journal (Accepted), arXiv preprint:2309.15377

[9] Huang B L, Tao Z Z and Zhang T J 2023 The Astronomical Journal (Under review), arXiv

preprint:2307.11368

[10] Werthimer D, Anderson D, Bowyer C S, Cobb J, Heien E, Korpela E J, Lampton M L,
Lebofsky M, Marcy G W, McGarry M et al. 2001 Berkeley radio and optical seti programs:
Seti@ home, serendip, and sevendip The Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI) in
the Optical Spectrum III vol 4273 (SPIE) pp 104–109

[11] Wang Y C, Tao Z Z, Zhang Z S, Lyu C, Zhang T, Zhang T J and Werthimer D 2023 The

Astronomical Journal 166 146

[12] Li J K, Chen Y, Tao Z Z, Luan X H, Zhang T J, Huang B L, Sun X H and Gajjar V 2023

The Astronomical Journal (Under review), arXiv preprint:2305.15715

[13] Gajjar V, LeDuc D, Chen J, Siemion A P, Sheikh S Z, Brzycki B, Croft S, Czech D, DeBoer

D, DeMarines J et al. 2022 The Astrophysical Journal 932 81

[14] Li J K, Zhao H C, Tao Z Z, Zhang T J and Xiao-Hui S 2022 The Astrophysical Journal

938 1

