Ivancan et al. Journal of Cardiothoracic Surgery 2013, 8(Suppl 1):O6
http://www.cardiothoracicsurgery.org/content/8/S1/O6

O R A L P R E S E N T A T I O N

Open Access

Effects of corticosteroids after total reapair of
congenital heart desease with extracorporeal
circulation
V Ivancan1*, Z Colak1, S Konosic1, R Gabelica1, D Anic2, D Belina2, M Petricevic2

From 23rd World Congress of the World Society of Cardio-Thoracic Surgeons
Split, Croatia. 12-15 September 2013

observed in group receiving (30mg/kg metilprednisolon
after induction in anesthesia), where we found the shortest
ICU stay (2,6 days vs. 7,9 – Ib; 4,8 – II; 5,4 –IIIa; 8,7 –
IIIb), the lowest requirements for inotropic support (40 %
vs. 80 % - Ib; 75 % - II; 100 % - IIIa, IIIb), the shortest ven-
tilation time (0,7 hours vs. 24,6 – Ib; 9,75 – II; 9,70 – IIIa;
16,6 – IIIb).

Conclusion
Our study presumably described that perioperative corti-
costeroids provide more favorable outcomes in group of
patients who undergo total correction of congenital
further prospective multicentric
disease. However,
randomized trials are required with aim to elucidate opti-
mal timing and dosing regimens of perioperative
corticosteroids.

Authors’ details
1Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care, University Hospital
Center Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia. 2Department of Cardiac Surgery, University
Hospital Center Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia.

Published: 11 September 2013

doi:10.1186/1749-8090-8-S1-O6
Cite this article as: Ivancan et al.: Effects of corticosteroids after total
reapair of congenital heart desease with extracorporeal circulation.
Journal of Cardiothoracic Surgery 2013 8(Suppl 1):O6.

Background
Nowadays, the use of cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) fol-
lowed by systemic hypothermia is common in cardiac
surgery procedures. CPB causes a systemic inflammatory
response syndrome (SIRS) that is markedly expressed in
congenital caridiosurgical surgery programe resulting with
deleterious consequences. Those effects are mediated
through cytokines and others mediators of acute inflam-
matory response in circulation, which may lead to low
cardiac output syndrome, multiorgan failure and lethal
outcome after surgical total correction of congenital heart
disease. The best method for SIRS prevention remains
unclear, although some authors suggest perioperative use
of corticosteroids. The study sough to evaluate the impact
of perioperative corticosteroids on SIRS extent as well as
clinical outcomes following total correction of congenital
heart disease.

Methods
The study was conducted as prospective randomized con-
trolled trial. We enrolled 60 patients who were scheduled
for total correction of congenital heart disease.

In this study we examine the effects of corticosteroids
in different doses and different time. Patients were
divided into three groups with respect to perioperative
corticosteroids administration regime.

Results
More favorable clinical outcomes as well as laboratory
findings were obtained in group of patients receiving high
doses of corticosteroids. The best clinical outcome was

* Correspondence: vivancan@kbc-zagreb.hr
1Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care, University Hospital
Center Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

© 2013 Ivancan et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

